What's new in RC1 (#2635)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/what-is-new/ef-core-5.0/whatsnew.md

title: What's New in EF Core 5.0
description: Overview of new features in EF Core 5.0
author: ajcvickers
ms.date: 09/10/2020
uid: core/what-is-new/ef-core-5.0/whatsnew
---

# What's New in EF Core 5.0

All features planned for EF Core 5.0 have now been completed. This page contains an overview of interesting changes introduced in each preview.

This page does not duplicate the [plan for EF Core 5.0](xref:core/what-is-new/ef-core-5.0/plan). The plan describes the overall themes for EF Core 5.0, including everything we are planning to include before shipping the final release.

## RC1

### Many-to-many

EF Core 5.0 supports many-to-many relationships without explicitly mapping the join table.

For example, consider these entity types:

```C#
public class Post
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public ICollection<Tag> Tags { get; set; }
}

public class Tag
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Text { get; set; }
    public ICollection<Post> Posts { get; set; }
}
```

> Notice that Post contains a collection of Tags, and Tag contains a collection of Posts. EF Core 5.0 recognizes this as a many-to-many relationship by convention. This means no code is required in `OnModelCreating`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that `Post` contains a collection of `Tags`, and `Tag` contains a collection of `Posts`. EF Core 5.0 recognizes this as a many-to-many relationship by convention. This means no code is required in `OnModelCreating`:
```

```C#
public class BlogContext : DbContext
{
    public DbSet<Post> Posts { get; set; }
    public DbSet<Blog> Blogs { get; set; }
}
```

> When Migrations (or `EnsureCreated`) are used to create the database, EF Core will automatically create the join table. For example, on SQL Server for this model, EF Core generates:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When migrations (or `EnsureCreated`) are used to create the database, EF Core will automatically create the join table. For example, on SQL Server for this model, EF Core generates:
```

Author: We capitalize Migrations when it refers to the EF feature, as opposed to an actual migration.

For example, consider two tables; one with modern posts; the other with legacy posts. The modern posts table has some additional columns, but for the purpose of our application we want both modern and legacy posts tp be combined and mapped to an entity type with all necessary properties:

```c#
public class Post
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public string Category { get; set; }
    public int BlogId { get; set; }
    public Blog Blog { get; set; }
}
```

In EF Core 5.0, `ToSqlQuery` can be used to map this entity type to a query that pulls and combines rows from both tables:

```c#
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
{
    modelBuilder.Entity<Post>().ToSqlQuery(
        @"SELECT Id, Name, Category, BlogId FROM posts
          UNION ALL
          SELECT Id, Name, ""Legacy"", BlogId from legacy_posts");
}
```

> Notice that the `legacy_posts` table does not have a `Category` column, so we instead synthesise a default value for all legacy posts.

Reviewer 2: I *really* don't want to get into touchy territory here, but do we have a standard on American vs. British spelling? :fearful: 

```suggestion
Notice that the `legacy_posts` table does not have a `Category` column, so we instead synthesize a default value for all legacy posts.
```

Reviewer 3: Our default docs are supposed to be en-us so machine translation can generate correct en-uk.

```c#
public class MySaveChangesInterceptor : SaveChangesInterceptor
{
    public override InterceptionResult<int> SavingChanges(
        DbContextEventData eventData,
        InterceptionResult<int> result)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"Saving changes for {eventData.Context.Database.GetConnectionString()}");

        return result;
    }

    public override ValueTask<InterceptionResult<int>> SavingChangesAsync(
        DbContextEventData eventData,
        InterceptionResult<int> result,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken = new CancellationToken())
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"Saving changes asynchronously for {eventData.Context.Database.GetConnectionString()}");

        return new ValueTask<InterceptionResult<int>>(result);
    }
}
```

Notice that:
* The interceptor has both sync and async methods. This can be useful if you need to perform async I/O, such as writing to an audit server.
* The interceptor allows SaveChanges to be skipped using the `InterceptionResult` mechanism common to all interceptors.

> The downside of interceptors is that they must be registered on the DbContext when it is being constructed. For example:

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't exactly call this a downside ;)

```suggestion
Note that interceptors must be registered on the DbContext when it is being constructed. For example:
```

Author: See #22359

```c#
    protected override void OnConfiguring(DbContextOptionsBuilder optionsBuilder)
        => optionsBuilder
            .AddInterceptors(new MySaveChangesInterceptor())
            .UseSqlite("Data Source = test.db");
```

In contrast, the events can be registered on the DbContext instance at any time.

### Exclude tables from migrations

> It is sometimes useful to have a single entity type mapped in multiple DbContexts. This is especially true when uising [bounded contexts](https://www.martinfowler.com/bliki/BoundedContext.html), for which it is common to have a different DbContext type for each bounded context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is sometimes useful to have a single entity type mapped in multiple DbContexts. This is especially true when using [bounded contexts](https://www.martinfowler.com/bliki/BoundedContext.html), for which it is common to have a different DbContext type for each bounded context.
```

> For example, a `User` type may be needed by both an authorization context and a reporting context. If a change is made to the `User` type, then migrations for both DbContexts will attempt to update the database. To prevent this, the model for one Context can be configured to exclude the table from its migrations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, a `User` type may be needed by both an authorization context and a reporting context. If a change is made to the `User` type, then migrations for both DbContexts will attempt to update the database. To prevent this, the model for one of the contexts can be configured to exclude the table from its migrations.
```

In the code below, the `AuthorizationContext` will generate migrations for changes to the `Users` table, but the `ReportingContext` will not, preventing the migrations from clashing.

```C#
public class AuthorizationContext : DbContext
{
    public DbSet<User> Users { get; set; }
}

public class ReportingContext : DbContext
{
    public DbSet<User> Users { get; set; }

    protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
    {
        modelBuilder.Entity<User>().ToTable("Users", t => t.ExcludeFromMigrations());
    }
}
```

### Required 1:1 dependents

> TODO

Reviewer: 👀

Author: Feel free _to do_ it if you want. 🙃

Reviewer: I'll do it [eventually](https://github.com/dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs/issues/2559)

> ### Options for migration generation

Reviewer 2: This may be a bit too provider-facing to be included in a list of "interesting" changes... I don't think it will mean much to anyone...

EF Core 5.0 introduces greater control over generation of migrations for different purposes. This includes the ability to:

* Know whether the migration is being generated for a script or for immediate execution

> * Know if an idempotent script is being generated

Reviewer 2: (or just lift "know whether" out of the individual bullets)

```suggestion
* Know whether an idempotent script is being generated
```

* Know if the script should exclude transaction statements (See _Migrations scripts with transactions_ below.)

This behavior is specified by an the `MigrationsSqlGenerationOptions` enum, which can now be passed to `IMigrator.GenerateScript`.

Also included in this work is better generation of idempotent scripts with called to `EXEC` on SQL Server when needed.

### Migrations scripts with transactions

> SQL scripts generated from migrations now contain statements to begin and commit transactions as appropriate for the migration. For example, the migration script below was generated from two migrations. Notice that each migration is now applied inside a transaction.

Reviewer 2: A small note on the possibility of disabling this?

Author: Added, although it it mentioned above.

```sql
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
GO

CREATE TABLE [Groups] (
    [Id] int NOT NULL IDENTITY,
    [Name] nvarchar(max) NULL,
    CONSTRAINT [PK_Groups] PRIMARY KEY ([Id])
);
GO

CREATE TABLE [Members] (
    [Id] int NOT NULL IDENTITY,
    [Name] nvarchar(max) NULL,
    [GroupId] int NULL,
    CONSTRAINT [PK_Members] PRIMARY KEY ([Id]),
    CONSTRAINT [FK_Members_Groups_GroupId] FOREIGN KEY ([GroupId]) REFERENCES [Groups] ([Id]) ON DELETE NO ACTION
);
GO

CREATE INDEX [IX_Members_GroupId] ON [Members] ([GroupId]);
GO

INSERT INTO [__EFMigrationsHistory] ([MigrationId], [ProductVersion])
VALUES (N'20200910194835_One', N'6.0.0-alpha.1.20460.2');
GO

COMMIT;
GO

BEGIN TRANSACTION;
GO

EXEC sp_rename N'[Groups].[Name]', N'GroupName', N'COLUMN';
GO

INSERT INTO [__EFMigrationsHistory] ([MigrationId], [ProductVersion])
VALUES (N'20200910195234_Two', N'6.0.0-alpha.1.20460.2');
GO

COMMIT;
```

> ### See pending migrations

Reviewer 4: By Psypher9

The `dotnet ef migrations list` command now shows which migrations have not yet been applied to the database. For example:

```
ajcvickers@avickers420u:~/AllTogetherNow/Daily$ dotnet ef migrations list
Build started...
Build succeeded.
20200910201647_One
20200910201708_Two
20200910202050_Three (Pending)
ajcvickers@avickers420u:~/AllTogetherNow/Daily$
```

> In addition, there is now `Get-Migations` command for the Package Manager Console with the same functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, there is now a `Get-Migrations` command for the Package Manager Console with the same functionality.
```

### ModelBuilder API for value comparers

EF Core properties for custom mutable types [require a value comparer](xref:core/modeling/value-comparers) for property changes to be detected correctly. This can now be specified as part of configuring the value conversion for the type. For example:

```c#
modelBuilder
    .Entity<EntityType>()
    .Property(e => e.MyProperty)
    .HasConversion(
        v => JsonSerializer.Serialize(v, null),
        v => JsonSerializer.Deserialize<List<int>>(v, null),
        new ValueComparer<List<int>>(
            (c1, c2) => c1.SequenceEqual(c2),
            c => c.Aggregate(0, (a, v) => HashCode.Combine(a, v.GetHashCode())),
            c => c.ToList()));
```

### EntityEntry TryGetValue methods

A `TryGetValue` method has been added to `EntityEntry.CurrentValues` and `EntityEntry.OriginalValues`. This allows the value of a property to be requested without first checking if the property is mapped in the EF model. For example:

```c#

> if (entry.CurrentValues.TryGetValue<string>(propertyName, out var value))

Reviewer 2: I usually prefer avoiding the explicit type parameter but obviously a matter of taste.

```suggestion
if (entry.CurrentValues.TryGetValue(propertyName, out string value))
```

{
    Console.WriteLine(value);
}
```

This feature was contributed by [@m4ss1m0g](https://github.com/m4ss1m0g). Many thanks!

### Default max batch size for SQL Server

> The default maximum batch size for SaveChanges on SQL Server is now 42. This value was obtained through [analysis of batching performance](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/9270), and not because we have discovered the Ultimate Question to Live, the Universe, and Everything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default maximum batch size for `SaveChanges` on SQL Server is now 42. This value was obtained through [analysis of batching performance](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/9270), and not because we have discovered the Ultimate Question to Life, the Universe, and Everything.
```

Reviewer 5: It think it is "The Ultimate Answer" ...

Author: Updated: Starting with EF Core 5.0, the default maximum batch size for SaveChanges on SQL Server is now 42. As is well known, this is also the answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and Everything. However, this is probably a coincidence, since the value was obtained through [analysis of batching performance](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/9270). We do not believe that we have discovered a form of the Ultimate Question, although it does seem somewhat plausible that the Earth was created to understand why SQL Server works the way it does.

> The default maximum batch size for SaveChanges on SQL Server is now 42. This value was obtained through [analysis of batching performance](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/9270), and not because we have discovered the Ultimate Question to Live, the Universe, and Everything.

Reviewer 2: :heart:

### Default environment to Development

The EF Core command line tools now automatically configure the `DOTNET_ENVIRONMENT` and `ASPNETCORE_ENVIRONMENT` environment variables to "Development". This improves the experience for working with ASP.NET Core during development. See [#19903](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/19903).

### Better migrations column ordering

> The columns for un-mapped base classes are now ordered after other columns for mapped entity types. Note this only impacts newly created tables. The column order for existing tables remains unchanged. See [#11314](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/11314).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The columns for unmapped base classes are now ordered after other columns for mapped entity types. Note this only impacts newly created tables. The column order for existing tables remains unchanged. See [#11314](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/11314).
```

### Query improvements

EF Core 5.0 RC1 contains some additional query translation improvements:

* Translation of `is` on Cosmos--see [#16391](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/16391)

> * User mapped functions can now be annotated to control null propagation--see [#19609](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/19609)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* User-mapped functions can now be annotated to control null propagation--see [#19609](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/19609)
```

> * Support for translation of GroupBy with conditional aggregates--see [#11711](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/11711)

Reviewer 3: Should we put example of this too? Not a huge feature as such but could help in educating users what more types of pattern we support now.

Author: Sure! 😁

Reviewer 3: Could include single query applying multiple aggregates
- Count with predicate
- Where + Min/Max
- Distinct + Sum/Avg

Author: @smitpatel I thought you were volunteering to write the examples... :-D

> * Translation of Distinct operator over group element before aggregate--see [#17376](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/17376)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Translation of Distinct over group elements before aggregate--see [#17376](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/17376)
```

Reviewer 3: But Distinct is applied over the group element 'g'.
There are inner elements in the group element.

Author: Leaving as is for now.

Reviewer 2: OK, just that English-wise I don't think it works as-is, but not very important.

Reviewer 3: There is nothing wrong English-wise here. You can apply Distinct over any enumerable stream.

### Model building for fields

> Finally for RC1, EF Core now allows use of the lambda methods in the ModelBuilder for fields as well as properties. For example, if you are adverse to properties for some reason and decide to use public fields, then these can now be mapped using the lambda builders:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally for RC1, EF Core now allows use of the lambda methods in the ModelBuilder for fields as well as properties. For example, if you are averse to properties for some reason and decide to use public fields, these can now be mapped using the lambda builders:
```

Reviewer 3: these methods

A noun should always be used after this/these to avoid ambiguity what it is referring to. For a non-native speaker it may be hard to understand.

```c#
public class Post
{
    public int Id;
    public string Name;
    public string Category;
    public int BlogId;
    public Blog Blog;
}

public class Blog
{
    public int Id;
    public string Name;
    public ICollection<Post> Posts;
}
```

```c#
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
{
    modelBuilder.Entity<Blog>(b =>
    {
        b.Property(e => e.Id);
        b.Property(e => e.Name);
    });

    modelBuilder.Entity<Post>(b =>
    {
        b.Property(e => e.Id);
        b.Property(e => e.Name);
        b.Property(e => e.Category);
        b.Property(e => e.BlogId);
        b.HasOne(e => e.Blog).WithMany(e => e.Posts);
    });
}
```

> While this is now possible, we are certainly not recommending that you do this. Also, note that this does not add any additional field mapping capabilities to EF Core, it only allows the lambda methods to be used instead of always requiring the string methods. This is rarely useful since fields are rarely public.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this is now possible, we are certainly not recommending that you do this. Also, note that this does not add any additional field mapping capabilities to EF Core; it only allows the lambda methods to be used instead of always requiring the string methods. This isn't very useful since fields are rarely public.
```

Reviewer 3: Docs tool recommended not using very as it does not add much value to reader in direct way. If we want to put emphasize then we should put the sentence in a different way.

Author: "This is seldom useful since fields are rarely public."

);
GO

CREATE INDEX [IX_Members_GroupId] ON [Members] ([GroupId]);
GO

INSERT INTO [__EFMigrationsHistory] ([MigrationId], [ProductVersion])
VALUES (N'20200910194835_One', N'6.0.0-alpha.1.20460.2');
GO

COMMIT;
GO

BEGIN TRANSACTION;
GO

EXEC sp_rename N'[Groups].[Name]', N'GroupName', N'COLUMN';
GO

INSERT INTO [__EFMigrationsHistory] ([MigrationId], [ProductVersion])
VALUES (N'20200910195234_Two', N'6.0.0-alpha.1.20460.2');
GO

COMMIT;
```

As mentioned in the previous section, this use of transactions can be disabled if transactions need to be handled differently.

### See pending migrations

This feature was contributed from the community by [@Psypher9](https://github.com/Psypher9). Many thanks for the contribution!

The `dotnet ef migrations list` command now shows which migrations have not yet been applied to the database. For example:

```
ajcvickers@avickers420u:~/AllTogetherNow/Daily$ dotnet ef migrations list
Build started...
Build succeeded.
20200910201647_One
20200910201708_Two
20200910202050_Three (Pending)
ajcvickers@avickers420u:~/AllTogetherNow/Daily$
```

> In addition, there is now a `Get-Migrations` command for the Package Manager Console with the same functionality.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In addition, there is now a `Get-Migration` command for the Package Manager Console with the same functionality.
```

Author: I just can't get this right! :facepalm:

Reviewer 4: lol, to be fair `Get-Migrations` was the name in EF6

ajcvickers@avickers420u:~/AllTogetherNow/Daily$
```

> In addition, there is now a `Get-MigrationsMigations` command for the Package Manager Console with the same functionality.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In addition, there is now a `Get-Migrations` command for the Package Manager Console with the same functionality.
```
